It does.
Okay, we're now recording.
I guess I'd like to start by just observing that your books are extraordinarily popular and bestsellers.
And there is kind of a paradox where people suggest today that nobody reads the Bible anymore, that there's a form of biblical illiteracy.
I wonder just
Can you explain this?
Is it a phenomenon, in your view, that writing so powerfully and directly about texts, which are not necessarily biblical texts, but certainly bear on the New Testament?
How can you explain this?
How do you explain this?
Well, I suppose it's true that fewer people read the Bible than used to.
I think that's true of our students, more than, say, for our generation.
There's a tremendous interest in issues about religion and spirituality.
And, you know, Tocqueville said this country is wildly religious, and I think that's still true.
I mean, it's still to be the case.
I'll just look at the presidential campaign and... Well, yes.
Yes.
I'm sorry, I have to run through that.
No, it's true.
But you think that you're bringing this... So it isn't just... I mean, a lot of people wouldn't say, read the Bible necessarily, but if you say...
I mean, look at a book like The Da Vinci Code, which I can't read.
Have you read the book?
No, no, I looked at it.
But what it says is that there's things left out of the tradition that we don't know about.
And that is true.
And that's what, of course, I write about.
So that is also very intriguing to people, because it intuitively makes sense.
And they sort of know that these books were chosen sometimes by somebody.
I guess they sort of know it.
many people stop their thinking about religion when they were five or six, you know, with whatever they learned when they were children.
And at least in America, you know, they're not encouraged to think about it.
Now, you've got these texts in the original?
When I can.
As they are transmitted to us, or even if you don't read the actual artifact, you're reading from
You're not relying.
There you go.
Absolutely.
Hoptic.
Which is a language of yours.
Seven, I think, that you've... Well, it's a language that I struggle with.
It's an African language related to Punic and Berber.
And, um, however... What was the other one?
Berber.
Berber, okay.
It's an ancient African language.
However, there's much of it here that
So, you know, this is translated from Greek, and Greek is much more familiar to me or to anybody who knows ancient languages.
Coptic is very hard.
I don't claim to read it well.
I just struggle through it like anybody who tries to read it.
The tentative title of my work in progress is Every Book is Reader.
I am interested in the original readers of texts, including the intended readership.
Oh, well, these texts were probably hidden.
Well, they were found near an ancient monastery.
They were probably copied by monks.
They're copied by somebody who put in the beginning of Codex I
of prayer attributed to the Apostle Paul.
And the prayer is for understanding and for insight and for wisdom and inspiration.
And so these are written and copied and loved and read by Coptic monks in about the year 320, maybe?
In the fourth century, to be sure.
Probably.
And they were there in the library when the archbishop sent an order telling the monks to get rid of them.
To get rid of them, or to hide them, do you think?
No, not to hide them, to destroy them, and never, because they lead people astray, and they seduce them, and they deceive them.
So the battle had been won or lost, depending on your point of view as being put forth.
The battle was joined very early, at least we know, when Irenaeus was writing his five volumes against the heretics in about 160.
and saying, you know, the heretics say they have more Gospels than they really are, but they really don't have any that are not full of blasphemy.
And then he talks about illegitimate secret texts, illegitimate bastard texts.
Bastard texts.
He calls these people the evil interpreters, I guess.
Right.
And they write all of these sort of apocalypsi, which means secret claims about secret writing, or apocryphoi, which means hidden things.
And so they write these terrible things, and these are blasphemous and awful, and basically authored by Satan himself.
So, you know, that's where we see at least the battle joined in the late second century, and then about 200 years later, the archbishop in a newly Christian empire was able to say, and I want you to destroy all of those, because those are bad.
and keep the twenty-six that we call the springs of salvation, which are in the New Testament.
So who do you think these people were that buried and meant to ask?
I think they were monks.
They were monks from the monastery who disobeyed the order.
Maybe they had participated in copying.
I mean, copying was very hard, long labor, and they didn't want to destroy all of these precious debts.
And they were precious to the monks.
Oh, certainly.
I mean, you don't copy a text.
It's not precious.
But I mean, if the order comes down that these are now evil and blasphemous and heretical, whatever, they should be destroyed, you have people who are, in a way, rebelling against the authority of their... No doubt.
...of their security.
Sure.
So the battle continues, in a way.
Not the battle, but the opposition, the asylum.
Right.
Oh, it did, yes.
And here they are found in 19, discovered in 1945.
It's amazing what the power of this suppression is.
I mean, for example, I have a colleague who studies the Dead Sea Scrolls, an Israeli, and she said, you know, if it hadn't been for the Dead Sea Scrolls, you'd think that Judaism is basically rabbinic.
It's all this rabbinic stuff about, you know,
how far you can walk on Shabbat, and what you can eat and what you can't eat, and sexual laws about intercourse after menstruation.
I mean, this kind of thing, you know?
You would not know that there's wild, mystical hymns, and strange apocryphal writings about joining the angels in the final battle of the universe, and things that really only turned up in what came to be Christianity.
I mean, crazy stuff from a Jewish point of view, because many representatives of Jewish tradition and scholars of Judaism wanted to say, well, of course, our tradition may look barbaric to some of you, as it did to the Romans, because of circumcision and other strange practices.
But in fact, it's very rational, it's very ethical, and it's really the best of all traditions, the most philosophic.
So they didn't want mystical nonsense garbled
you know, ecstatic speculation, things like that, or end-of-the-world talk, you know, this kind of thing.
Many people thought that was just something that only very fringe groups would endorse, and Christians, you know, being among them.
So, she said, if it weren't for the Dead Sea Scrolls, we'd think that everybody was a rabbinic type of Jew.
And, in fact, there's a much wider range there than we ever knew.
And, in fact, the Dead Sea Scrolls arrived totally unannounced.
We did not know they existed.
Now, you also point out that we knew that the Gnostics existed.
We just didn't have the text.
Well, we knew that there were people called holy ones who lived out in the desert and were particularly devout.
But, you know, did we know they had a library?
Not at all.
So, you know, these are not the people of the rabbis' lives, and the people who wrote this are not the people.
The Discourse on the Eighth and the Ninth.
This is a dialogue of a father and his son.
This means a teacher.
Ava is a teacher.
Talking about how one goes into the higher state of being and becomes enlightened in an ecstatic way.
This discourse.
It's quite wonderful.
But it's not the kind of thing that Orthodox bishops wanted people doing, or trying.
Pardon me if I jump around a little bit, but I have a question.
No, no, it'll come back.
I guess, really, again, who do you think that the original readers were meant to be, then, for these texts?
Because you've also said that Christianity, using that word, was a
was a number of competing movements, and we did not have one.
Yes, like Judaism.
Exactly.
Or not even so—they might even be provincial, you know?
It's not even so much competing—well, they were competing very often, but they were just lots of different kinds of groups, you know?
And the audience—well, it's hard to know.
I mean, these texts—monks, obviously, but also educated people, interested people, often
people who were familiar with Plato and Plotinus and the works of philosophers.
So this was as much an intellectual inquiry as it was a spiritual inquiry?
Well, those were never divorced, and they weren't in the followers of Plato or the Platonic teacher, Plotinus, who was also caught up into states of contemplative mysticism.
You know, these are some of the same groups.
Exactly.
We've broken them down.
a lot more specifically in our time.
You have a very interesting paragraph in Beyond Belief where you talk about those who are translating these texts 1,500 years after the fact into English, and how we're losing the sense of Jesus and the man who now has a special relationship with God, the vocabulary of Jesus.
Oh, well, what I meant... And what I meant the role of the translator here and the interpreter.
Well, what I meant, actually, that's the beginning of the Gospel of John.
You know, and it says, in the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God, and He was in the beginning with God, and this and that.
He came forth from the light.
But then when you look at the Greek, you say, wait a minute.
It doesn't say He.
It says the Logos, the Word, came forth from the light.
It.
You know?
But some translator is saying, well, this has got to be about Jesus, right?
Because the Word is Jesus.
Now, for a
first or second century Jewish intellectual.
The word might just be the divine word that was spoken in the beginning.
Daniel Boyar, my colleague at the University of California, has written about this, that lots of Jews could use this kind of language, and they certainly wouldn't mean Jesus by it.
But because the translator of what we call the Gospel of John knows it's got to be Jesus, Jesus is the whole point for the translator.
So, you know, he takes
I presume it's he, they usually were, who takes the term, which in Greek is about the word, and personalizes it and turns it into Jesus, the person, instead of the divine word.
So that, anyway, there... And this is happening, we're talking now about the fourth century, or are we up into... Well, I was talking about, actually there, about
the translators in the English, the King James.
That's what I thought, yes, that's what I thought.
Yeah.
The King James translation.
King James translation, when you take the Greek... 1610, 1611... Yeah.
And not just the King James, but probably, I don't know, I haven't looked at the Luther Bible, but they're probably in German.
I'm not sure.
So is it the role of the translator?
I mean, is the translator making a theological decision?
Sure.
I mean, it may not be the role, but it's unconscious.
I mean, if the translator says, oh,
Wouldn't it be almost a little, I hate to judge it, but it almost seems like it'd be a little more insidious than that, you know?
It's not insidious, but deciding what this word means, there's almost an agenda at work here.
There's an agenda, I think, you're right, but it's probably not even a conscious one, you know?
It's not like, oh, I'm going to do this so it will sound like it.
I mean, it's just assumed, you know?
It's assumed, but when you talk
The first three Gospels, Matthew, Mark, Luke, Jesus is a man.
John, and then the battle is between John and Thomas, as you, who's going to go out here.
And really, we are making the transition here to deity, it seems to be.
Yes.
I mean, John puts a poem at the beginning of the Gospel.
And many people, many scholars think the poem predates
So it would be an ancient Jewish poem about the divine word that God spoke in the beginning, and how light came forth from it, and it came into the world, and it's manifest, and so forth.
The background of Jewish mysticism is that.
But the translator's going to think, oh, this is the Gospel of John.
Of course, this has got to be Jesus we're talking about.
So it's not a conscious decision very often, particularly with these texts.
You have people assuming that they know what it's about, you know?
So when you approach these texts, do you come with any baggage at all?
Or do you come with an open mind, shall we say?
No, with lots of baggage.
And the hard work is to unlearn things you think are obvious.
You know, you think, well, of course that would be Jesus, wouldn't it?
And, you know, lots of baggage, you know?
Well, you just... You try to read it as naively as possible.
Naively?
Yeah.
The word means open.
So, you know, you try to say... Do you mind if I take a few pictures?
No, it's okay.
I mean, you try to think, well, what would a first century reader think of it, you know?
Do you know the book of Revelation in the New Testament?
Well, I have to confess I don't.
I've been reading something by one of our graduate students, a book that he wrote, suggesting that it's not a Christian book and it's not about Jesus at all, but a divine figure appears who looks like a human being, and of course Christians would assume it's Jesus.
Who else could it be?
So that's what I mean.
There's a huge amount of cultural baggage, but I think in the case of religious traditions, a lot of it is unconscious.
One of your critics has suggested that you
believe that perhaps the good stuff was left out of the button.
Are you familiar with that review?
Is that Luke Timothy Johnson?
Yeah, it was cute.
You know who he is?
If I didn't know how polemical he can be in his other books, I would think it was a nasty review.
Actually, he was rather soft on me.
I thought it was pretty decent.
It was rather soft on me for him.
I don't know him like that.
He's a very meek little man who writes the most vitriol.
But he seems to have, certainly, you talk about bringing baggage to, bringing a point of view to a subject, he seems to realize that.
Well, he's very, he hates this kind of work.
He's a very orthodox Catholic.
I don't think the good stuff was left out.
I'm just saying there's lots of stuff.
And some of the things, I think, are very good were left out, yes.
But there's some things that also are very good that are in there.
Are you hopeful that more texts will be found?
It would be very interesting, although I think it could easily be, you know, another find would be.
would be on earth that we certainly don't know.
What would be a missing link for you?
There's a lot of texts that we don't know.
I mean, there are probably hundreds that we have titles of that we don't know anything about.
Well, many, many more than we have texts.
It seems to happen throughout, of course, the body of cultural textual transmission.
Well, I got a call a few years ago from somebody who said that he had the Gospel of Judas Iscariot, and he shocked me because
Irenaeus tells us in the year 160 that there is a gospel of Judas Iscariot, and we've never seen it.
So I realized it was possible.
And he did have, he is a dealer in rare books, and he is a very well-known dealer.
These things are so seductive, aren't they?
Because they're supposed to be Shakespeare's Love Labors One, you know, because the Stationist Register says that Shakespeare entered a play called Love Labors, as opposed to Love's, where Love Labors Lost.
So, where's the lost play?
You know, there was one play that he supposedly had written, which he had lost, I guess, a character who survived.
That's supposedly a lost Shakespeare play that I found in her.
It's a great opportunity for a forger.
Sure, sure, if you can write that well.
Do you run across any much material that they
determined to be fraudulent or to be a hoax?
Yeah, I mean, that one, for example, the Gospel of Judas Iscariot, was named that.
I went to Cleveland to see it.
You went to see it.
Yeah, I did.
But it wasn't a very interesting text, unfortunately.
It wasn't.
It was clearly something that had meant that.
No, and the owner was hyping it, you know, that it was a dialogue between Judas Iscariot and Jesus about the betrayal, but it wasn't anything like that.
Now, of these fifty-two codices, I do believe a few were destroyed, weren't they?
Yeah, actually, it's not fifty-two codices, it's fifty-two texts.
Fifty-two texts, twenty-something.
Oh, yeah, fifty-two texts.
I forget how many codices.
There's eleven?
Yeah, I think so.
Do you think natural selection plays a role in what's about vibes, or what kind, in terms of
I think it's an evolutionary phrase.
Sure.
In the sense that texts that are popular get copied and copied and copied.
And actually, natural selection plays a large role, I think, in the development of humans, you know, in what people accept.
It's not all as, you know, some people would think it's a grand conspiracy on the part of the Vatican or some paranoid fantasy about what they do.
It's just that there are certain texts that are very appealing, which is also what Mark is very appealing, I think.
It's interesting.
I had an interview with Christopher Ricks a couple of weeks ago, and we were talking about poetry, and then inevitably the discussion of the literary canon comes up, and how does he feel about the canonization of literary texts?
It bothers him, because he said that word obviously does come from sacred texts.
It comes from a whole other sphere.
And implies censorship.
And definitely implies censorship.
And where Helen Venla, for instance, believes that, I said, how do you feel that canons, I think, in a literary sense have developed?
And she said other writers.
It's not people who get together in a kind of little committee of the NLA or whatever and say, we are designating the Library of America or the French Playad editions.
These are now canonical texts.
And she believes over time it's other writers who
give their apparition to texts.
I wonder if there's anything similar.
Well, they're writers and readers, too.
I think, you know, the Gospel of Mark.
I mean, you may remember that Alex McGowan was an actor who performs the Gospel of Mark.
And he came here to perform it.
He's a British actor.
But he simply spoke it.
And you can recite it in an hour and a half.
And he did the parts.
He did a very vivid rendering of the Gospel of Mark.
And so that's probably the way people heard it.
They probably heard it as a performance.
So I think it has a lot to do with the livelihoods of the stories.
I mean, the Gospel of John has a lot of good stories in it, too.
What would you like?
What would really please you to learn?
has just been discovered as an ancient text.
Well, that's interesting.
Well, I love the Gospel of Thomas.
I'd like to see the rest of the Gospel of Mary Magdalene, the Gospel of Judas.
You know, there are many other things.
And you're convinced they're out there.
They're not out there, but they were.
They did exist, yeah.
They did exist.
Yeah.
But we only found a very small fraction of, you know, there's hundreds of hundreds and hundreds of texts.
But it's very interesting to find.
You find out it's different with writers, what Helen Bendler said about poetry.
I mean, and she is part of a literary establishment at Harvard and the whole business.
And we are part of it here and so forth.
But in the case of the Christian canon, it has to do with the institutionalization of particular people and their legitimation.
as rulers of the Christian churches, you know, whether it's Pope Shenouda III in Egypt, or whether it's, you know, John Paul.
Not meaning to go too far off the track, but do you feel that a religion, any religion, needs a text to validate itself?
I mean, is it essential?
No, I think some more than others.
That's interesting, because you know that the ones called the people of the book are the people for whom the book is primary, so it's really...
Jewish tradition that establishes itself through written text.
And, of course, this is an offshoot of that, and so is this one.
Buddhists, of course, have text.
Hindus have, well, they do have a big data.
Well, Buddhism was transmitted orally for at least five hundred years, I think, before this.
Yeah.
So they had the sutras, and they had teachings, but often they were orally transmitted.
It's certainly much more the case for Western religions that we know.
However, in antiquity you have lots of religions that have very few texts.
The religion of the god Mithra or the ancient temples for the gods were not based on books at all.
They were based on ritual practice and what you do in the temple and gathering the community.
celebrating games and honoring the gods.
It was not about that.
Are you familiar with an exhibition in 1963, and it was a British library, and it was called Printing in the Mind of Man, 1963.
And it's kind of given me the premise for this book that I'm working on.
It was an exhibition of what they had decided were 440 books since prints over the previous violent years that had measurably impacted it.
440 books?
Yeah, they picked 440.
Only 14 American books.
But there have been any number of different books.
And it's not just Copernicus and Newton and Einstein and Freud, but it's Volta and Electricity or Harvey and the Circulation of Blood.
Baden-Powell and the Creation of the Boy Scouts, for instance.
Influential books, not books that necessarily changed the world, but made significant, interesting things happen.
And then two of the books are, and then there was a similar exhibition at the Groyer Club in New York where they picked 100 influential books.
And so you had Joseph Smith, you know, his Book of Mormon, and you had Mary Baker Eddy, her book.
These are cases, again, of fairly recent religious movements, but where it's a book.
And what's significant about them, I would guess.
I mean, I could show you dozens of others that I get sent every day.
And what's not so significant as Mary Baker, Eddie, or Joseph Smith is that those have movements, right?
Those have institutions, which are quite extraordinary and worldwide, you know?
And fairly recent.
Yeah.
But, you know, that kind of book, actually, may be, and there's a very interesting analysis by a scholar of ancient Rome,
Fergus Miller, called The Roman Near East, in which he says, really, it's... Where is it?
Fergus?
Fergus Miller.
Fergus.
The Roman Near East.
He says that, really, it's the book, the scriptures, that gives a sense of continuity to Western.
That's exactly what I... Because, I mean... The Roman Near East is the title.
I remember I was... That's what I see the publisher is.
I don't know.
He was talking about the Phoenicians, the Babylonians.
I mean, those ancient peoples don't have their, well, put it this way.
I was teaching with a colleague, of course, called Judaism and Christianity, some controversial issues.
And the students, this was in New York, they weren't interested in what we were interested in.
he and I, but they were interested in who was right.
And at a certain point, one of the students said to me, she was very upset about something, but where are the Babylonians today?
And I said, well, what do you mean?
They're alive and well and living in Brooklyn.
And she looked at me like I was totally insane.
And I thought, now, isn't it interesting that she thinks that she has a continuity with people who lived 3,000 years ago?
How does she get that?
How does she get it?
Fergus Miller says she gets it through the Bible.
These are our people.
There's Adam, and there's Abraham, and there's our people, and we are these tribes, and so forth and so forth.
And there is a continuity.
Now, there are plenty of other people who were living in, you know, 3,000 years ago.
That's not very long ago, by my standards.
But no people, there aren't people who necessarily say, I belong to them.
You know, the ancient Phoenicians are my people, or whatever.
So, it's the book, Fergus Miller argues, that creates an imaginary... Was the book in a generic sense, or the book in a... No, the very specific book, the Bible, the Hebrew Bible, that creates a sense of continuity, so that people in Ohio today, not to speak about Ohio, but in New Jersey, in New Jersey,
walking around in the 21st century will say, well, what should I do?
What would Jesus do?
You think, gee, that's 2,000 years old.
But that person is trying to organize a life around a sense of continuity with Jesus in Nazareth.
Now that's pretty amazing.
So, you know, they're claiming a kind of continuity, and that's only created by that book.
by the appendage to the Hebrew Bible, which is the writings of the followers of Jesus.
So I'm just saying, Fergus Miller suggests that it is the Bible that creates an imaginary community.
I'm not sure if he uses that term, but I would.
An imaginary community, a sense of continuity with those people, which many cultures don't have.
Now, if you go to Egypt, of course, have you been here?
Well, there the continuity exists in stone, right?
The Egyptians have visible evidence of their continuity with the ancient world.
But many people don't have that.
Well, the Great, which is not Egypt, but it's in Persia, the Cliff of Begislu.
You're familiar with it.
There's a traveling little description of Darius the Great.
And it was on a cliff that nobody could read.
I mean, so it was 500 feet up, and they smoothed it over.
And so you wonder, really, who these inscriptions were put on the rocks for.
They were the gods.
Was it Mayer or Robinson, who was 1838, 1836?
It was three years even before the invention of the daguerreotype.
And so he could look at it with a telescope from the ground.
And he said, I suppose I could draw it.
to draw copies, but really he did these heroic things to go up and dangle from the cliff and to make these casts, they call them squeezes, of these.
And remember, this was the key, by the way, to deciphering Kenia for him.
And this is in the 1840s.
But you wonder, who were they putting it up there for?
And it was a great tribute to Tarius.
He defeated a couple of armies.
But it's a text.
It's absolutely a text that's carved on the cliff of a mountain in Tehran, one day Iran.
Well, those give people a sense of community.
I was thinking about the Norse epics or the Iliad, you know, give people a sense of these are our people.
Hello?
I'll leave a few.
The tape isn't with me?
No, no, no, I just shut it off.
I've read an awful lot of stories about you, so I've been trying to avoid replicating the things you answered elsewhere, but I am really interested in how you came.
I know about you coming to New York and dancing and feeling, well, unless I'm going to be truly fabulous at what I do here.
Ambitionism.
I was just wondering about the lore of these texts and what it was.
Well, when I started to read them.
I mean, I was just told that they were ridiculous, you know.
And this is when you were at Stanford, or is this not what you're at?
No, only at Harvard.
I mean, no, I never heard of them.
So what did you major in at Stanford?
History and dance.
And dance.
So really, this was not part of the discourse at that particular point.
Nobody knew about this stuff.
I went there to study the beginning of the Christian movement.
I didn't know there were all these secret gospels that I discovered.
If they hadn't been published yet, they were still in content.
Amazing.
So I was just amazed.
And what was it about them?
I mean, first of all, it was fun.
We had all this amazing stuff.
What is it?
And second, I really like these texts.
The Gospel of Thomas, as you can see, I love this text.
And many people, I mean, you say, what do you bring to the text?
What do you assume?
Well, many people thought,
We were told then that they would just be, as my beloved professor, Mr. Stendhal, said recently to me, he said, well, before you wrote about them, we just thought these texts were weird.
And, of course, we did.
I mean, we were told they were weird.
This is a professor, a scholar.
Yes, yes.
An authority in this field.
He's a New Testament scholar, retired now, and he was the dean of the Harvard Divinity School, Swedish Lutheran Archbishop.
We just thought they were weird.
And he was an expert on the Dead Sea School.
And I was told they were blasphemous and strange, and they didn't make sense.
They were kind of garbled.
They were kind of just a bunch of magical nonsense.
These were by your teachers who told you they were?
Nonsense.
Yeah.
So they were discouraging you from?
Well, they thought it was interesting, but we ought to publish them.
But they just, you know, they were mostly quite serious Christians, certainly Christopher is.
And this stuff just didn't look like anything they'd seen.
And I started to read the Gospel of Thomas, and I thought,
You know, when I read this, if you bring forth what is within you, what you bring forth will save you.
And I thought, well, you know, that's really powerful.
You don't have to believe it.
It's just sort of, it's just a recognition that there's a powerful truth in it.
And I don't really care whether Jesus said it, you know.
I mean, I was just very struck by the word.
But the words resonate with you.
Yeah, and secondly, we were told, well, uh,
a lot of people began to say, well, maybe these aren't just totally weird, maybe these are actual sayings of Jesus when he was in Galilee.
And some of them obviously are, like, blessed are you poor, for yours is the kingdom of heaven, or, you know, some of those sayings are so well known, and you know them in Matthew, that, sure, they probably are Jesus' teachings.
He talks about the destruction of the temple, you know, I will destroy this house, it must be a reference to the temple, that's the charge in which he was executed.
So,
Yes, there's a lot of sayings of Jesus in there.
So many people thought, as John Dominic Crossan, I don't know if you know his work, but Crossan writes a lot about this stuff, popular books about it, and he's a good scholar of parables.
He thought, well, the living Jesus of the Gospel of Thomas is just good old historical Jesus walking around.
I don't think so.
You know, I think it's much more mysterious.
I think Jesus is a kind of divine presence speaking.
You know, it's not about...
some man in the first century Galilee, although that's what a lot of scholars now think.
They think, well, oh, this isn't about some transcendent being.
This is just about an ordinary teacher.
I don't think so.
They thought about that man as a spokesman for the divine.
It's not that he was so special any more than you or I, but that we are also very special because we're grounded in the divine source in the way that he was.
So there's a very...
sort of, if you like, a spiritual view of Jesus, but it's one that includes all being, which is very different.
Now, you came to this as a Ph.D.
candidate at Harvard, right?
Yeah.
And were the texts in facsimile there?
I'm just wondering about your exposure to the texts.
Well, we had, we were reading them.
You were reading them.
So it was part of the course of study, and you were reading them.
Yeah, yeah.
And so you were reading them as an, I hate to trivialize it, but as an exercise or something.
Yeah, we were supposed to sort of, well, there's all this stuff we should translate and publish and so forth.
Oh, publish.
So publishing and publication was?
Oh, yeah.
I mean, our professors had that in mind.
You know, the whole group of people would publish, and many of them did.
Many of the people who went there are the people who are publishing them.
And so you took it to the next step, which is not just read it, translate it, and publish it.
Well, when I wrote the Gnostic Gospels, I mean, there were thousands of things written about these texts by then.
I'd never heard of them until that book of yours, in 1979.
No.
There were thousands of articles and books in French and German, Spanish, Japanese.
English, but just scholarly work, scholarly work, you know, saying, what is this body of literature?
But I was asking myself, what difference does it make that we found this?
I mean, what difference does it make to the way we understand the Christian movement?
And is it possible to write about this in a way that engages people who aren't scholars?
Because it's so exciting, this material.
That's what I love, is that you took it to that level.
Yeah.
To make it, people say to me, why do you write books about bibliophiles and libraries?
You know, I get this vacant look, you know, oh, you're writing about book collectors or off-site storage in libraries.
I said, there's good stories there.
Trust me when it does.
You know, obviously I'm published by trade publishers, and there's a leadership in my book.
But the point is to try and reach an intelligent audience out there that is interested in matters and
But you really tapped into something, which was, I mean, the Gnostic gospel was electrifying.
It was my first year of National Book Critics.
I remember we were always a long way trying to find this book in the world.
How did you know it then?
Were you on the family?
I was a member.
I was actually a founding member of the year.
My predecessor, I was a book editor in Worcester, Massachusetts, and my predecessor there was the founder of the National Book Critics.
I see.
That was the award that Jason S. died.
Well, that's a nice one.
Forget about the National.
Yeah.
Well, my first book was a finalist for that award, which I was in the 20s.
That was a gentleman that's in Leomania.
Oh, yes.
Well, I had asked Christa Stendhal, you know, why didn't you write about the Dead Sea Scroll when you knew about this stuff?
Because that's what... Before, before, I mean, Wilson.
Yes, yes.
It was in the 50s, I think.
Before, well, Christa was working on this.
He knew all about this stuff.
He was going around to synagogues giving talks about the D.C.
scrolls.
It was different.
There was a cartel.
They were restricting access to it.
Well, they were to this stuff, too.
Really?
Absolutely.
Do you think scholars were... Fear?
For the same reason?
Or was it just control?
No.
They wanted the glory of publishing these things, the same way the people in the D.C.
scrolls did.
But I asked him, why didn't you write about this before Edmund Wilson did?
And he said, well, we...
And I thought that it might trouble people to think that Jesus wasn't as unique as they wanted to think.
So it's their reading of a text that they're making decisions.
Yes.
He's a clergyman.
That's kind of dangerous waters.
I said, I said, that's so condescending.
And he laughed.
He's a wonderful man.
And he said, well, yes, it is.
That's how the clergy was.
It'll hurt us if we read it.
I mean, it's fine.
It will shake our faith, do you think?
Is that the feeling?
Yeah, I think so, because to find out that it isn't just Jesus, but there are a lot of other radical Jews in the first century going around saying things like, the end of the world is coming.
Harold Bloom tells me he's an agnostic, by the way.
Yes, he does.
Which I love, you know, because he started, this is a, I think a couple of years ago, I forget what it is, he would really like to have an agnostic sermon, he said.
And then he started to laugh, he said, because really,
We do.
It would be an audience of one, you know.
That was crazy.
I don't entirely agree with him.
I mean, I always enjoy him, but we do have Gnostic sermons.
The Gospel of Truth is one of those, and it's very beautiful.
It's beautiful.
Well, it's kind of religion that we can all really like.
I mean, I think it's a very appealing concept.
I think so.
For people who have open minds.
Beyond belief, I guess the question has to be, especially the way you begin it, and I don't want to get into that, but was it a form of therapy as well as a form of scholarship for you to do what you did?
Well, I guess you could call it that.
I mean, it certainly, I realized when I wrote Adam Even the Serpent, and, um,
And Bill Moyers asked me about the book and about things that were going on in my life.
And it was the first time I had sort of completely recognized how, I mean, I was aware that it's very personal, the work that I do.
Like any art, you know?
No matter what it is, I'm sure yours is.
And it may be more or less visible to the reader.
But I was quite aware that my life and my work are completely connected.
So, yes, it works out issues I have to deal with.
I mean, I think I write to clarify issues that I want to clarify.
You wouldn't go so far as to say they're cathartic in any way.
Working out comes close, doesn't it?
I don't know, because that suggests that one has a
one for all sort of a single release moment as, you know, in a tragedy or something.
There's a moment in which sort of the grief or whatever is let go.
I don't find it that simple actually in real life.
But all of my books work out questions that I find I have to deal with.
Working out for yourself in the process of what you have.
Sure.
The Nazi Gospels was
directed toward people who, like me, were interested in questions about religion and spirituality, but disaffected from institutions.
And these texts gave me a way to talk about that issue.
Isn't it something that you go and you find this in texts that are about 1700 years old?
I think it's a stunt.
You know, I've been reading the Varieties of Religious Experience.
Do you know William James's Varieties of Religious?
I've been reading that, and he's talking about religious experience and how people want an immediate, direct sense of contact with the Divine, you know?
So being an American psychiatrist, he goes to journals and conversations with psychiatrists and reports of conversion and so forth and so forth.
And just now, my desk is full of
similar accounts, which are thousands of years old.
Some of them from Nakamati, some of them in Jewish sources, some of them in the New Testament.
You don't have to go to 20th century accounts to find that.
And they're very powerful.
So, I guess it's interesting to me to find that, you know.
And it's essential for you, obviously, because you can, to read the document in its original.
Yes, it is.
Because otherwise you're dealing with somebody else's interpretation of it, of course.
And even when you read them in Coptic or Greek, you're dealing with your own English, I'm translating into English, sadly, you know, the Greek.
And then what you're reading is still a copy of something that had been written 300 years prior, isn't it?
Yeah.
So there's, you know, all these fascinating layers of interpretation that play into the way we read.
That's wonderful.
You wonder how many people in the world can do this, who have a facility of logic and have the intellectual acumen and perception to come and to do this and to be interested in doing it and to derive meaning out of it.
But then, as you said, I at least have to do it as most of us do today, I would say, self-conscious.
I'm reading with a twenty-first century view, you know, of somebody who's, you know, a professor in some establishment like this, and with certain kinds of experiences attuning me to certain parts of it, and probably making others, making me oblivious to others, you know?
I just recently got a couple of books from Oxford, and I just read them.
The Acknowledgements of Beyond Belief, The Lost Christianity.
Oh, Bart Ehrman.
Yeah, and I haven't had a chance to, but I have gone home.
How, because there are so many books on these lost texts and discovered texts, rediscovered, recovered, all of these different words I use, lost, recovered, discovered.
Is this kind of complementary to what you're doing with the material that he has there?
Well, I would say, I would,
I don't want to deprecate Bart Ehrman's work.
He's trying to get a sense of where he's at.
Let me just tell you where he's at.
I would look at the work of Steve Patterson, Marv Meyer, many other scholars working on the text, many people who translate this stuff and read this stuff.
There are lots of very good scholars.
My problem with Bart Ehrman is that he's a New Testament scholar.
He writes good texts on New Testament.
He knows that stuff.
I think he must be some Orthodox Christian.
Because when he comes to these other texts, why does he come to these other sort of lost Christianity?
Well, you'll see if you look at the book.
Why does he do it?
Because everybody's talking about them.
He's just now finishing a book on the Da Vinci Code because he wants to ride the wave.
There's a bestseller, which is
I know, Dan Burstein's book.
But I mean, but his, you know, it's kind of the anti-Da Vinci Code book.
Have you seen that?
The Da Vinci Code is number one in fiction, but then over in non-fiction, down there about 10 or 12, is decoding the Da Vinci Code.
Uh-huh.
But it's amazing how critical work brought out in the air of publication itself becomes a major test.
Well, Bart is hoping for that, but the point is, he's never written about these texts before, and he does so from
telling you that from the beginning, some texts are really Orthodox, and some texts are really Gnostic.
And by that he means escapist, dualistic, nihilistic, and all of the clichés that everybody has always said from the 1880s.
So when he sort of lost Christianities, he's basically looking at the editing process that went into the making of the New Testament, and maybe these texts were perhaps worthy, but really not.
Partly, yes.
I mean, like all of us.
But it's not like this other stuff that's really kind of fundamentally challenging the whole structure.
No, because we would all say there are lots of Christianity, lots of Judaism.
That's just the way scholars talk these days.
His own view is that there are some really good ones and there are some really bad ones, and he knows what you're with.
So this is part of the editing process.
Yeah, so he'll tell you that Thomas is proto-Gnostic, that it's escapist, it's nihilist.
If you read in his Introduction to the New Testament what he says about the Gospel of Thomas, it's ridiculous.
And I talked to him about it two years ago.
I said, Bart, why are you saying that you can't read the Gospel of Thomas if you don't understand, before you read it, that it's escapist, dualistic, nihilistic, etc.?
Because it isn't any of it.
I said, have you read it?
Of course he's read it.
He said, well, it doesn't make sense if you don't read it that way.
And I said, it makes perfect.
It's completely monistic.
There's not a touch of dualism.
What are you talking about?
He only can see it as a heretical book.
And so with all these other things.
There's got to be something defective, or they'd be on the right side of the mind.
So that's the presupposition.
And that's why his work, I find it.
Well, you just mentioned him in your own.
No, I like Bart.
We're friends.
But I guess that's another concept you have to deal with, heresy.
Yes, of course.
The stigma of being heretical, and what are you doing, devoting your energy and your profession to these texts that may be perceived as heretical works, I guess.
Yeah, sure.
Tell me what your time comes down.
I am okay until 3.30.
Oh, good.
So we can wrap it up.
I've had close to an hour, which is just wonderful.
I have the books.
There's a wonderful body of stuff on LexisNexis.
Who is that?
What is that?
Oh, that's a search engine.
Oh.
I've never looked.
Billions of prints I haven't been sure.
I get it at home.
pay a fee to do it.
So I can do a search for, I don't know, tables, agnostic texts.
Just set up the different things, and it will give me stories that I've written about you and your work over the last 25 years.
Oh, gosh.
Somebody told me they can get all the reviews of this book, and I have never seen it.
Is that right?
Some people tell me they can get all the reviews.
Oh, sure.
I can do it for five minutes right here.
Can you?
Sure.
How?
If you have access to LexisNexis.
Well, let's take a look.
I don't know.